simple and easy
are two different things i received a
question
from a member of the audience asking me
about the
safety reliability advisability
of nuclear power generation
my answer is simple but it's not easy to
grasp
the problem we're dealing with here is
not a scientific question
of what is safe or unsafe
we're asking a question about politics
we're asking a question about human
nature
the problems with nuclear reactors
nuclear waste
nuclear power generation are human
all too human they have to do with
political structure
authority ultimately human
responsibility
and human nature on the most profound
and general level i just mentioned
that i often have to reflect on what a
strange
minority of human beings are capable of
thinking politically
at all i very often have conversations
with people
who are computer programmers i very
often have conversations with people who
are
scientists and say chemistry or biology
and it's very strange to me that they
are in some ways intelligent people
perhaps in some ways
highly highly accomplished successful
people
and yet they're really totally incapable
of doing what it is i do
so casually and constantly in not just
thinking about politics
understanding politics analyzing
situations but also being able to
communicate that to others explain to
others what the issues are and
come to recommendations or decisions
about it to me it doesn't feel like
there's anything extraordinary about me
but on the other hand i never developed
my mind in a way that i'm able to do you
know
molar math i'm not able to think in
terms of the periodic table the elements
i'm not able to do the type of
computations that are involved in those
sciences
i don't know how it would have changed
my character from an early age i'd
developed in that direction
i think training yourself to be a
computer programmer over time this also
has similar
consequences for your way of thinking
and for what is
unthinkable to you now i've done a lot
of reading
recently about the french revolution and
the rise of napoleon after the french
revolution
and one of the interesting things about
that period of history
is that i'd say it was the last period
of history
in which the most important politicians
were also the most famous and renowned
scientists
i'd like to propose to you that that was
not a good thing
that was actually one of the reasons why
the french revolution ended
in failure the marquis de condorcet
is remembered as one of the greatest
scientists and mathematicians
of his era great innovator
but perhaps the reason why his own
political career
ended in failure perhaps the reason why
he was unable
to communicate to other people very
simple and fundamental ideas like
that women should have equal voting
rights and privileges in parliament
and to accomplish those goals or basic
equality for people of black skin
brown skin different ethnicities and so
on he was right about many things
that the western world didn't didn't
come to the right answers about for
a century uh thereafter he was ahead of
his time most people would say
but he was a scientist he didn't
understand human nature he didn't
understand
how the how to play the game of thrones
he actually was a hit author
but the books he wrote weren't really
political in this sense
and in case you didn't know he ended up
dying in a prison cell
he was himself torn down and destroyed
by the same revolution that earlier
lifted him up and put him in his vision
of power
one of the very first conflicts i had at
the university of victoria
here in british columbia canada one of
the very first conflicts i had was about
nuclear power and the other people i was
talking to
i think all of them were under 30 but
they were variously
ba students m.a students phd students
in the sciences and it was really
remarkable to me
how impossible it was to get them to
take this simple step
i concede the point that on the
chalkboard
nuclear power may look completely safe
completely reliable we can draw out a
diagram
and show how it works and it can be
completely simple and unproblematic
but my method of reasoning is not to
start from an abstraction
on the chalkboard and to work my way
down to material reality
i start with reality and work my way up
so i say here's a list of
nuclear power generating stations in the
world
still in operation in order of their
first
construction so there were still some
built in the 1960s
1970s early 90s they're still generating
power
to this day um
if you take the particular names of any
of those
older generators and put them into
google
you are going to find newspaper articles
interviewing scientists very often
scientists who just visited and took a
tour of the facilities for whatever
reason
you're gonna find interesting scientists
saying this is really dangerous
it should be shut down this is not a
case
where you can say there's like the
informed scientific perspective over
here and then someone like myself
represents a naive jejune outsiders on
scientific perspective
no you can find examples
of reactors that have been in constant
use since the 1970s or early 1980s
that are in venezuela
that are in argentina
that are in poverty-stricken countries
with serious political instability
serious doubts about the competence
of the government at the best of times
and those governments go through periods
of real bankruptcy and of course
questions of corruption and so on and so
forth
so now i'm not talking about a nuclear
generator that's
on a chalkboard i'm talking about a
nuclear generator
in a third world country where the
government is going through
a sovereign debt crisis a total collapse
of the economy
where there are issues like corruption
mr and i was just
writing these people this is all email
saying
can't you recognize this can't you see
the danger
can't you see the problem and this isn't
a hypothetical worst case scenario this
is a real world scenario right now
and again i didn't have to go far each
of these generators has a distinctive
name obviously i didn't google
all of them but it seemed like every
single one whenever i just took the name
put it into google i'd find a couple of
articles even and i was only looking in
english
in english it was like well these
scientists visited this nuclear
generator and said boy you know
they should be decommissioned or shut
down or there should be a major overhaul
there are safety concerns right so
uh the people i was talking to at
university of regina
absolutely could not or would not
budge and again i don't know who the
oldest
maybe there was someone there who was
maybe there were a couple people over 40
because a lot of people here in canada
go back to university later in life
um there wasn't it wasn't a real young
crowd but let's say a lot of these
people are around
age 25 and yet they were already
absolutely set in their ways they
already had this
mentality that i i find is very common
among scientists
very common among computer programmers
very common among
video game addicts where they absolutely
cannot think politically
and reality is political okay
i mean human nature once you move up
from a scale of just one or two people
it's political you might trust one
person to run this nuclear power plant
nuclear power plants aren't run by one
person right and again in a context like
argentina
it doesn't matter how much you trust
that one person there's a whole
structure of authority a culture and so
on and so forth
now the context for that conversation i
had at university of china
that by the way ended with me being
kicked out of the group and so on there
was real
acrimony um you know and again i don't
see myself as anti-science here
but they see me that way they saw me as
being company they could not stand to
keep
um the context was the disaster in
fukuyama daiichi japan
japan is not a third world country
it's one of the wealthiest countries in
the world japan is not a terribly
corrupt country it has one of the most
efficient and effective
governments in the world it has probably
the lowest
crime rate of any large country in the
world japan and singapore
probably number one number two um
japan has incredibly high levels of
education
they have especially high levels of
education in the sciences especially
in many ways japan is an absolute
best case scenario and yet even there in
japan
we saw this avertable nuclear energy
disaster with terrible consequences that
are still ongoing today
so the judgment you make about
nuclear energy about nuclear power is
not
a judgment about science it's not a
judgment about a theory
on a blackboard it's a judgment about
how those scientific principles
are going to be put into practice by
human beings
by human beings and positions of
authority by complex governments that
collect taxes and sometimes prolong and
misspend those taxes
governments that can be corrupt
governments that can be bankrupt
and there are worse examples to consider
there are
nuclear generators in countries that are
right now in a state of civil war
there are nuclear generators in
countries that have
terrorist attacks right
you may not be planning on having a
civil war right now
venezuela isn't planning that so
argentina isn't planning to it's quite
possible
right nobody plans for this stuff
the people who live their lives thinking
in terms of computer programming and
thinking in terms of abstractions on a
chalkboard
they are in many ways in our society
today
the same kind of obstacle to progress
that the church men
represented in the past there was a time
when the catholic church
in england the anglican church when
large church organizations were a major
part of political negotiations were part
of the progress of society
and they were an obstacle to that
progress and part of the problem was
that those are men who had been trained
to reason
from abstractions in the sky down to
thinking about
what we have here in reality on the
ground that's exactly the wrong
form of reasoning and in our times
we have these men who are so esteemed
many of them become wealthy and powerful
and influential
because they've managed to make money
with computers
and with chemical formulae with
breakthroughs in
technology sciences
but they too like the church men think
from abstractions down to dictating
what reality ought to be given those
abstract principles and that is the
opposite of thinking responsibly
that's the opposite of thinking
politically that's the opposite of
reasoning
from human nature from real conditions
to the conclusions on a policy level
of what we ought to do